README.md, before:

# Sprint Challenge: Express and Node.js - Projects & Actions

## Description

In this challenge, you design and create a web API to manage the following resources: `Projects` and `Actions`.

## Instructions

**Read these instructions carefully**. Understand exactly what is expected **_before_** starting to code.

This is an individual assessment, please work on it alone. It is an opportunity to demonstrate proficiency of the concepts and objectives introduced and practiced in preceding days.

If the instructions are not clear, please seek support from your TL and Instructor on Slack.

The Minimum Viable Product must be completed in three hours.

Follow these steps to set up and work on your project:

- [ ] Create a forked copy of this project.
- [ ] Add your _Team Lead_ as collaborator on Github.
- [ ] Clone your forked version of the Repository.
- [ ] Create a new Branch on the clone: git checkout -b `firstName-lastName`.
- [ ] Implement the project on this Branch, committing changes regularly.
- [ ] Push commits: git push origin `firstName-lastName`.

Follow these steps for completing your project.

- [ ] Submit a Pull-Request to merge `firstName-lastName` Branch into master on **your fork, don't make Pull Requests against Lambda's repository**.
- [ ] Please don't merge your own pull request.
- [ ] Add your _Team Lead_ as a Reviewer on the Pull-request
- [ ] Your _Team Lead_ will count the challenge as done by merging the branch into _master_.

## Commits

Commit your code regularly and use descriptive messages. This helps both you (in case you ever need to return to old code) and your Team Lead.

## Self-Study/Essay Questions

Demonstrate your understanding of this Sprint's concepts by answering the following free-form questions. Edit this document to include your answers after each question. Make sure to leave a blank line above and below your answer so it is clear and easy to read by your Team Lead.

- [ ] Mention two parts of Express that you learned about this week.

- [ ] Describe Middleware?

- [ ] Describe a Resource?

- [ ] What can the API return to help clients know if a request was successful?

- [ ] How can we partition our application into sub-applications?

## Minimum Viable Product

- [ ] Configure an _npm script_ named _"server"_ that will execute your code using _nodemon_. Make _nodemon_ be a development time dependency only, it shouldn't be deployed to production.
- [ ] Configure an _npm script_ named _"start"_ that will execute your code using _node_.

Design and build the necessary endpoints to:

- [ ] Perform CRUD operations on _projects_ and _actions_. When adding an action, make sure the `project_id` provided belongs to an existing `project`. If you try to add an action with an `id` of 3 and there is no project with that `id` the database will return an error.
- [ ] Retrieve the list of actions for a project.

Please read the following sections before implementing the Minimum Viable Product, they describe how the database is structured and the files and methods available for interacting with the data.

### Database Schemas

The description of the structure and extra information about each _resource_ stored in the included database (`./data/lambda.db3`) is listed below.

#### Projects

| Field       | Data Type | Metadata                                                                    |
| ----------- | --------- | --------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| id          | number    | no need to provide it when creating projects, the database will generate it |
| name        | string    | required.                                                                   |
| description | string    | required.                                                                   |
| completed   | boolean   | used to indicate if the project has been completed, not required            |

#### Actions

| Field       | Data Type | Metadata                                                                                         |
| ----------- | --------- | ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ |
| id          | number    | no need to provide it when creating posts, the database will automatically generate it.          |
| project_id  | number    | required, must be the id of an existing project.                                                 |
| description | string    | up to 128 characters long, required.                                                             |
| notes       | string    | no size limit, required. Used to record additional notes or requirements to complete the action. |
| completed   | boolean   | used to indicate if the action has been completed, not required                                  |

### Database Persistence Helpers

The `/data/helpers` folder includes files you can use to manage the persistence of _project_ and _action_ data. These files are `projectModel.js` and `actionModel.js`. Both files publish the following api, which you can use to store, modify and retrieve each resource:

**All these helper methods return a promise. Remember to use .then().catch() or async/await.**

- `get()`: resolves to an array of all the resources contained in the database. If you pass an `id` to this method it will return the resource with that id if one is found.
- `insert()`: calling insert passing it a resource object will add it to the database and return the newly created resource.
- `update()`: accepts two arguments, the first is the `id` of the resource to update, and the second is an object with the `changes` to apply. It returns the updated resource. If a resource with the provided `id` is not found, the method returns `null`.
- `remove()`: the remove method accepts an `id` as it's first parameter and, upon successfully deleting the resource from the database, returns the number of records deleted.

The `projectModel.js` helper includes an extra method called `getProjectActions()` that takes a _project id_ as it's only argument and returns a list of all the _actions_ for the _project_.

We have provided test data for all the resources.

## Stretch Goal

- Use `create-react-app` to create an application in a separate folder (outside the API project folder). Name it anything you want.
- From the React application show a list of all _projects_ using the API you built.
- Add functionality to show the details of a project, including its actions, when clicking a project name in the list. Use React Router to navigate to a separate route to show the project details.
- Add styling!

Commit message:

add react app with GET, DELETE, POST methods

README.md, after:

# Sprint Challenge: Express and Node.js - Projects & Actions

## Description

In this challenge, you design and create a web API to manage the following resources: `Projects` and `Actions`.

## Instructions

**Read these instructions carefully**. Understand exactly what is expected **_before_** starting to code.

This is an individual assessment, please work on it alone. It is an opportunity to demonstrate proficiency of the concepts and objectives introduced and practiced in preceding days.

If the instructions are not clear, please seek support from your TL and Instructor on Slack.

The Minimum Viable Product must be completed in three hours.

Follow these steps to set up and work on your project:

- [ ] Create a forked copy of this project.
- [ ] Add your _Team Lead_ as collaborator on Github.
- [ ] Clone your forked version of the Repository.
- [ ] Create a new Branch on the clone: git checkout -b `firstName-lastName`.
- [ ] Implement the project on this Branch, committing changes regularly.
- [ ] Push commits: git push origin `firstName-lastName`.

Follow these steps for completing your project.

- [ ] Submit a Pull-Request to merge `firstName-lastName` Branch into master on **your fork, don't make Pull Requests against Lambda's repository**.
- [ ] Please don't merge your own pull request.
- [ ] Add your _Team Lead_ as a Reviewer on the Pull-request
- [ ] Your _Team Lead_ will count the challenge as done by merging the branch into _master_.

## Commits

Commit your code regularly and use descriptive messages. This helps both you (in case you ever need to return to old code) and your Team Lead.

## Self-Study/Essay Questions

Demonstrate your understanding of this Sprint's concepts by answering the following free-form questions. Edit this document to include your answers after each question. Make sure to leave a blank line above and below your answer so it is clear and easy to read by your Team Lead.

- [ ] Mention two parts of Express that you learned about this week.

The first part I’ve learnt about routing so that is how an application endpoint respond to clients request that includes using Express methods corresponding to HTTP method (and also CRUD operations). The second part of Express I have got to know is writing and using middleware.

- [ ] Describe Middleware?

It’s a function that takes a request object and either returns response to the client or passes control to another middleware function. One of express middleware examples is route handling function.

- [ ] Describe a Resource?

Resource is a primary data representation in REST. It can be any information that can be named. Examples of a resource can be system users, user accounts or network devices.

- [ ] What can the API return to help clients know if a request was successful?

API can return status code that conveys the results of a client’s request. Request starting with 2xx, indicated that request was accepted successfully.

- [ ] How can we partition our application into sub-applications?

Express Router let us split application into different files, which creates sub-applications. We can separate the main server file from the file handling the routes.

## Minimum Viable Product

- [ ] Configure an _npm script_ named _"server"_ that will execute your code using _nodemon_. Make _nodemon_ be a development time dependency only, it shouldn't be deployed to production.
- [ ] Configure an _npm script_ named _"start"_ that will execute your code using _node_.

Design and build the necessary endpoints to:

- [ ] Perform CRUD operations on _projects_ and _actions_. When adding an action, make sure the `project_id` provided belongs to an existing `project`. If you try to add an action with an `id` of 3 and there is no project with that `id` the database will return an error.
- [ ] Retrieve the list of actions for a project.

Please read the following sections before implementing the Minimum Viable Product, they describe how the database is structured and the files and methods available for interacting with the data.

### Database Schemas

The description of the structure and extra information about each _resource_ stored in the included database (`./data/lambda.db3`) is listed below.

#### Projects

| Field       | Data Type | Metadata                                                                    |
| ----------- | --------- | --------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| id          | number    | no need to provide it when creating projects, the database will generate it |
| name        | string    | required.                                                                   |
| description | string    | required.                                                                   |
| completed   | boolean   | used to indicate if the project has been completed, not required            |

#### Actions

| Field       | Data Type | Metadata                                                                                         |
| ----------- | --------- | ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ |
| id          | number    | no need to provide it when creating posts, the database will automatically generate it.          |
| project_id  | number    | required, must be the id of an existing project.                                                 |
| description | string    | up to 128 characters long, required.                                                             |
| notes       | string    | no size limit, required. Used to record additional notes or requirements to complete the action. |
| completed   | boolean   | used to indicate if the action has been completed, not required                                  |

### Database Persistence Helpers

The `/data/helpers` folder includes files you can use to manage the persistence of _project_ and _action_ data. These files are `projectModel.js` and `actionModel.js`. Both files publish the following api, which you can use to store, modify and retrieve each resource:

**All these helper methods return a promise. Remember to use .then().catch() or async/await.**

- `get()`: resolves to an array of all the resources contained in the database. If you pass an `id` to this method it will return the resource with that id if one is found.
- `insert()`: calling insert passing it a resource object will add it to the database and return the newly created resource.
- `update()`: accepts two arguments, the first is the `id` of the resource to update, and the second is an object with the `changes` to apply. It returns the updated resource. If a resource with the provided `id` is not found, the method returns `null`.
- `remove()`: the remove method accepts an `id` as it's first parameter and, upon successfully deleting the resource from the database, returns the number of records deleted.

The `projectModel.js` helper includes an extra method called `getProjectActions()` that takes a _project id_ as it's only argument and returns a list of all the _actions_ for the _project_.

We have provided test data for all the resources.

## Stretch Goal

- Use `create-react-app` to create an application in a separate folder (outside the API project folder). Name it anything you want.
- From the React application show a list of all _projects_ using the API you built.
- Add functionality to show the details of a project, including its actions, when clicking a project name in the list. Use React Router to navigate to a separate route to show the project details.
- Add styling!
